From the New York Times, I'm [music]
Natalie Kitroof. This is the daily.
>> President Trump pushing ahead with
sweeping plans to trim the size of the
federal government.
>> President Trump is ramping up
deportations in Democrat-led cities. The
US has attacked three nuclear sites in
Iran.
>> At the heart of many of President
Trump's most controversial policies,
there's been one company, Palunteer. The
core mission of our company always was
to make the West, especially America,
the strongest in the world, the
strongest ever been.
>> According to Palanteer CEO, the company
exists to defend Western ideals. But to
its critics,
>> some worry that Palanteer could give the
government sweeping almost futuristic
surveillance capabilities.
>> Palanteer is enabling the
administration's illiberal tactics.
[music]
Today, Times contributor Michael
Steinberger on how Palunteer CEO who's
described himself as a lifelong Democrat
became a champion of President Trump,
how his political transformation shaped
one of the most secretive companies in
the world, and the impact that
transformation could have on American
democracy. Palanteer [music]
is here to disrupt and make the
institutions we partner with the very
best in the world and when [music] it's
necessary to scare our enemies and on
occasion kill them.
>> It's Tuesday, December 16th.
Michael, welcome to the show.
>> Thank you for having me.
>> You just published this book. It's
called The Philosopher in the Valley
about Palunteer and its CEO, Alex Karp.
And in the process of working on that
book, you spent a lot of time with KARP
and inside the company, this company
that is playing a very unique role in
the second Trump administration. So I
can't think of anyone better to ask.
What exactly does Palanteer do?
>> Well, first I should say that it's a
quite secretive company. A lot of its
work is done with intelligence services,
the military. So there's a lot of stuff
they do that they can't talk about and
we can't know about. The work is also
technologically quite complex.
Essentially, Palanteer makes software
that enables organizations to make
faster, better use of their data.
Typically, we're talking about large
organizations that collect sizable
quantities of data. Palanteer software
pulls in all the data, merges it, and
then finds patterns, trends, connections
in that data, stuff that might elude the
human eye. One very powerful example of
Palanteer's work was in the war in
Ukraine. Palanteer's software is the
backbone for the Pentagon's AIdriven
targeting program and this was used
extensively in the first months of the
war to help the Ukrainians withstand the
Russian assault. So a lot of satellite
data was being pulled in by the US
military along with intercepted Russian
communications. And the US military was
able to say to the Ukrainians, okay,
here's where there's a troop formation.
There's a general here. If you fire a
missile at these coordinates, you might
be very happy with the results. And
Palanteer's technology was instrumental
to this and played a very significant
role in enabling the Ukrainians to
withstand the initial Russian assault.
So that example of the war in Ukraine
obviously shows the value of this
software, but this is a company that
also prompts a lot of concern, right?
Can you just explain that part?
>> Yeah, it not only prompts a lot of
concern, many people regard Palunteer as
possibly the most dangerous company in
the world.
>> Part of this is some of the clients it
has. Uh it's used by the CIA. In fact,
the CIA was an early investor in
Palanteer. It's also used by the Mossad
and other clandestine services. It's
used extensively by law enforcement. Uh,
a lot of personal information is flowing
through Palanteer's pipelines and the
company has also been at the center of
the issues that have dominated the
headlines this year and have generated a
lot of controversy. ICE and
deportations, Doge, Gaza, Iran, and AI.
>> Can you just go a little deeper on one
of those examples? Like how has it been
at the center of things? Well, for
instance, Palanteer's technology is
integral to the immigration crackdown
taking place right now. ICE is making
extensive use of Palanteer's technology
to identify and facilitate deportations.
And what has people particularly
concerned is that ICE appears to be
building a massive surveillance
apparatus and Palanteer appears to be at
the center of that. Now, Palanteer sees
itself as a force for good in the world.
But even people at the company
acknowledge that it technology could be
used to do harm and it's been clear for
some time that its technology in the
hands of an authoritarian regime would
be a very powerful tool. And who gets to
use Palanteer software and for what
purpose is decided by one person, the
company's CEO, Alex Karp.
>> Tell me about Alex Karp. Who is he? Alex
Karp is maybe the most unique figure on
the global business scene. Uh he and I
first started talking in 2019. We had a
couple conversations that year,
including one at a home that he owns in
Vermont.
>> So, you just found this place.
>> Mhm. It's a little bit of a dump, but I
like it.
>> It's nice.
>> To say the home was off the grid would
be an understatement.
>> I'm I'm happy with it.
>> I like it. And I mean, you've got
privacy here.
>> Yep.
>> Yeah. No, my neighbors I don't know if
you saw the neighbors. They're like a
farmer to the left here.
>> Yeah.
>> We had a conversation over lunch, but
it's difficult for Karp to sit still.
And as soon as we were finished,
>> you know, why don't we go for a walk and
I'll tell you about
>> took a long hike. We were trailed by two
of his bodyguards.
>> Got the bodyguards with us again.
>> And two more bodyguards remained in the
parking lot.
>> If my phone is around, someone's
listening.
>> Someone is listening.
>> Definitively.
>> So a foreign intelligence agency.
>> Absolutely. It would be irresponsible
for them not to listen to my phone call.
>> So the conversation very security
conscious and for a good reason. He's
running a company that works with the
CIA and other clandestine services that
is a major defense contractor.
>> Do you worry about your personal safety?
>> Absolutely you do.
>> It'd be insane not to.
>> Yeah.
>> I mean, when they got me the bodyguards,
I thought I was insane, but now I think
it's pre because historically we've
gotten lots of threats from like
farright neo-Nazis.
>> Now, I mean, it's like people who hate
us
>> come in many different stripes.
>> Yeah. and he's had a very unusual path
to this role.
>> And what is that path?
>> He's a Philly kid. He grew up in
Philadelphia, grew up in a very
left-wing household. His father was
Jewish pediatrician. His mother is black
and an artist. He's biracial, Jewish,
and also severely dyslexic.
>> It's like I have this weirdly structured
brain. The motor is just structured
differently.
>> Yeah. Yeah. You think differently. And
Karp and his brother, who's two years
younger, spent a lot of time going to
anti-war protest, anti-uclear protest.
And he ends up going to college locally
to Hfordford College, a small liberal
arts school with a strong tradition of
disscent. Perfect place for someone who
grew up in the political ailia that Karp
did. I should acknowledge at this point
that he and I were classmates at Hford.
>> Amazing. I should acknowledge at this
point that I grew up on Hford College's
campus because my parents taught there.
Hford's a small place, but it is
converging in this moment here, isn't
it?
>> Indeed.
>> So, in any event, he Yeah. He insists
that he didn't work that hard at
Havford. I think his path in life would
suggest otherwise. I think the library
saw a lot more of him than it did of me,
which may go some way to explaining why
he became a billionaire and I did not.
But as a young man, he identified very
strongly with his black heritage. At
Hford, he was very involved with black
student affairs. In our senior year in
college, he organ helped organize an
anti-racism conference at Yale
University. After Havford, he goes to
Stanford Law School, which he considers
one of the biggest mistakes of his life.
>> I just hated it.
>> He's [snorts] miserable there. He finds
the intellectual climate very
dissatisfying. The only thing that makes
law school tolerable for Karp is the
friendship he strikes up with another
first year law student at Stanford.
>> I met Peter there. Peter Teal.
>> Peter Teal, the now very prominent
libertarian conservative, now a big
Republican donor.
>> Exactly. They bonded over their shared
dislike of law school, and they also
bonded over their love of political
argument. As Teal said to me, he was
more the capitalist, and Karp was the
socialist. We've been having these feral
discourses now for 25 26 years. Karp
says that they argued like feral
animals. Wow.
>> These dorm room bull sessions were
apparently epic.
>> Got it. They had their own little debate
club.
>> That's right. So, you know, Carpental
graduated from Stanford Law in 1992.
Karp had no intention of pursuing a
career in law. Instead, he went to
Germany to pursue a doctorate in
philosophy.
>> But I became myself in my adolescence in
Germany.
>> Yeah.
>> You say f which means like I was able to
expand into my true self.
>> Yeah.
>> Or the self I was most comfortable with.
>> Gotcha. Yeah, he went to Germany because
he was, you know, the writers that he
found most impactful were German, but he
was also drawn there because he was
Jewish. His father's family had come
from Germany and he wanted to gain a
deeper understanding of the Holocaust
and why Germany, which had been the
pinnacle of European civilization,
descended into such barbarism and turned
on its Jewish population so savagely.
And he ends up writing his dissertation
on the rhetoric of fascism.
>> Meanwhile, Peter Teal is back in the
United States. He works for a time for a
New York law firm, then ends up working
at an investment bank. Unsatisfied with
that, he heads back out to Silicon
Valley where the dot boom is underway
and co-founds an online payments
company, PayPal, in 1998.
3 years later, the world changes.
>> Just a few moments ago, allegedly, a
plane has crashed into the World Trade
Center
>> when 911 happens.
>> Oh, there's another one. Another plane
just hit, right? Oh my god, another
plane.
>> The unthinkable happened today. The
World Trade Center. Both towers gone.
>> The American people want the answers
to so many questions around 9/11.
>> Teal wonders if the attack could have
been prevented had government agencies
been able to more readily share
information with one another. The FBI
had information. [music]
The CIA had information. If that
information had been pulled, it's
possible the attack could have been
prevented. The 9/11 Commission when it
issued its final report in 2004 [music]
said that there had been a failure to
connect the dots in part because
information was siloed. And this is the
idea that gives rise to Palanteer.
[music] Tio believed he could create a
company that would help intelligence
analysts connect the dots, find the
needles in the haststack, [music] and
prevent future attacks.
And it's around this time that Karp
resurfaces in the Bay Area. Um, he's
back from Germany and he and Teal
reunite. Teal asks Karp to help him
raise some money for Palanteer. This
company he's trying to get off the
ground. Teal interviews a couple of
people for the CEO position, but then he
and the other people involved in
founding Palunteer realized Karp is
probably the right guy for the job. Can
you say why? Because Karp actually seems
to me an unlikely pick to be CEO. He
isn't really in the Silicon Valley tech
scene at this point, right?
>> No, he's not. I mean, in some ways, he's
a very unlikely choice. And he admitted
as much to me.
>> I had no skills. [laughter]
>> That's the truth. I wasn't trained in
business. I didn't know anything about
startup culture. I didn't know anything
about building a business. I didn't know
anything about financing a business.
>> He's got no background in business, no
training in computer science. And of
course, he's coming from a left-wing
household and now he's going to be
working for a company that's at the
nexus of technology in the national
security state. He is, yeah, on paper a
very unlikely fit. And yet, he is very
passionate. I mean, the moment he gets
involved, he is very passionate about
what Palanteer is doing.
>> Yeah. I just thought this sounds like
the coolest idea ever.
>> You thought? Yeah. So,
>> so if I pass this up, I'll I'll regret
it.
>> What exactly about what Palanteer is up
to at this point is Karp passionate
about? Well, Palanteer is this rare
burden that's a very ideological
company. It doesn't exist just to help
the US government fight the war on
terrorism, but it exists more broadly to
help defend the West. That is their
view. And he's passionate about this,
defending the West, but also defending
what he sees as core Western values.
Freedom of speech, freedom of assembly,
freedom of religion, what we know as
civil liberties. He believed that
Palanteer could develop technology that
would enable the government to find the
bad guys without becoming a massive drag
net pulling in lots of innocent
Americans. And he's drawn to Paliner's
mission for very personal reasons,
reasons that are tied to his own
identity.
>> If you're if you're me and you wake up
every morning, like I still do, thinking
I am totally screwed. That's how I wake
up every morning. That's how I've been
waking up every morning my whole life.
>> You wake up every morning think I'm
totally screwed. Yeah, because
>> he understands from a young age. He says
that he had in his view some strikes
against him
>> and I am this racially amorphous Jewish
kid who's also dyslexic. I am [__]
>> That's how I see myself. That's how I
saw myself.
>> And it's a sense of vulnerability he
carries into adulthood and brings with
him to Palanteer.
>> There's no aspect of my life that was
not motivated by absolute terror
that propelled almost every decision. It
propels a lot of decisions to this
company and I don't have less of it than
I did when I was a little kid. [snorts]
>> And in the aftermath of 911, there was
obviously a lot of concern that there
were going to be many more terrorist
attacks. And Karp's view is that when
people feel threatened, whether because
of crime or because of terrorism, they
inevitably turn to the far right.
>> And why do I care about this endency of
the far right? Because who's the first
person that's going to get hung
>> when they come to power?
>> By the way, the far far far left isn't
much better either. You make a list and
I will show you who they get first. It's
me.
>> And he wants to prevent that because
liberal democracy, robust protection of
minority rights, these are things that
matter greatly to him personally. And so
he sees Palanteer as a way of possibly
preventing that political outcome. It's
interesting. He views preventing
terrorist attacks as key to preventing
the American public from turning to the
far right out of fear.
>> Exactly. He thought that if there were
more terrorist attacks and many more
mass casualty events because of
terrorism, voters were inevitably going
to turn to the far right because they
think that the far right will protect
them and they will become much less
inclined to uh protect minorities and so
forth because they they're scared and
they want protection and they think the
far right will protect them. They will
turn to authoritarianism. He wants to
prevent that outcome and he sees
Palanteer as a means possibly of helping
prevent that.
>> Okay. And how does this ideological
bent, this commitment to defending the
West actually manifest in Palanteer's
work?
>> Well, it begins with the CIA, which
becomes a Palanteer client. They then
develop a business with the US military.
This is very much in keeping with their
mission. They want to be the software
supplier of choice to the national
security state. But then in the 2010s
they start developing business on the
civilian side of the federal government
with a number of government agencies
including ICE
>> and this contract becomes a flash point
for Palunteer the most controversial
part of Palanteer's work for the
government
>> and what is Palanteer doing for ICE at
least at the beginning
>> well it's a relationship that began
actually under the Obama administration
a lot of Palunteer's work begins with
clients in moments of crisis
and ICE had a crisis on its hands.
>> And now, news about the shooting of two
Americans south of the US border in
Mexico. One Immigration and Customs
Enforcement agent killed, another
wounded.
>> An [music] ICE special agent had been
assassinated by a Mexican drug cartel.
>> Driver, special agent Haime Zapata was
shot several times in the chest and
killed.
>> And ICE needed help finding the
assassins. There's an intense manhunt
underway in Mexico right now for the
killers of an American immigration
officer. Both US and Mexican
investigators involved [music]
>> turned to Palanteer and within a matter
of hours, Palanteer engineers had the
[music] software up and running for ICE
and were pulling in a wide variety of
data including phone records, bank
records, [music] any footage that might
have been pulled from surveillance
cameras. And within two weeks
>> that after Haime Zapata was laid to rest
yesterday, a Mexican authorities took
one [music] of the suspects into
custody. Today
>> they had apprehended the asalent and
also confiscated
millions of dollars worth of drugs.
[music]
After that, ICE awards Palanteer a
contract in 2014
working with a branch of ICE called
Homeland Security Investigations, which
deals with things like human trafficking
and drug trafficking. It's a
relationship that doesn't draw much
attention until Donald Trump is elected
president the first time in 2016. He had
run on a promise to crack down on
immigration and ICE is instrumental to
enforcing that crackdown and Palunteer
becomes the object of protests because
of its relationship with ICE.
>> How so?
>> PALUNTEER.
>> There are protests outside its
headquarters in Palo Alto
>> AND IMMIGRANTS ARE UNDER ATTACK. WHERE
DO WE GO?
and outside other Palunteer offices.
>> Protesters held signs like Palunteer,
"Wake up, you're complicit."
>> There are boycots on campuses, people
saying that they don't want Palunteers
recruiters to appear on their campuses.
Palanteer is kicked out of several major
tech conferences because people don't
want it there. And there's also a fair
amount of internal disscent. There are
hundreds of employees at Palanteer who
make known their objection to working
with ICE and to having any role in
Trump's immigration crackdown. I'm
interested. How does Karp, this one-time
activist himself, this son of leftists,
how does he respond to the outcry on the
left over this contract?
>> Well, he makes clear back in Trump's
first presidency that he is not a fan of
Donald Trump.
>> I understand why the protesters protest
us.
>> I grew up protesting people,
>> but he also thinks that the protesters
and Democrats more broadly are very
misguided on the issue of immigration.
And you know, I am a progressive and
many progressives believe that we should
have strong border enforcement.
>> So that's going to be part of the
progressive tent if we progressives want
to win. Now,
>> voters are not happy about scenes of
chaos at the border. They don't like
illegal immigration because they think
that it would depress the wages of
working-class Americans. And Karp's view
is that if Democrats and progressives
don't take those concerns seriously,
they're going to turn to people who do.
That's why Donald Trump was elected in
2016 in Karp's view. And this is a very
consistent position all along for Karp.
It's the same view that informed his
view of terrorism. If people on the left
don't take concerns about public safety
seriously, voters are going to turn to
people on the right who do. And people
on the left are not going to like the
results.
>> Interesting. He justifies the work
Palanteer is doing with ICE as very much
fitting into this idea of securing the
border, something he views as a
progressive stance. He does. He says at
this time that he is the progressive
warrior. He's the true progressive. He
is doing more to defend the values that
liberals claim to cherish than they are.
He believes that Palanteer and whether
it's helping enforce immigration laws or
fighting terrorism is defending liberal
progressive values.
But he's also stung by the criticism
that he and Palanteer are getting from
the left, by the vitrial directed at
them.
And over time, he grows increasingly
disenchanted [music] with the Democrats
and the left. Disenchantment that grows
during the Biden presidency. And that
culminates [music]
with a massive event that ends up
cementing his break with the Democrats,
the October [music] 7th terrorist attack
in Israel.
We'll be right back.
Okay, Michael. So, by the time of the
October 7th attack on Israel in 2023,
you'd been interviewing Alex Karp for
several years. So, how'd you see him
change after that moment?
>> Well, Karp is shaken by the events of
October 7th, as many people were. He's
very supportive of Israel. He sees
Israel security in very personal terms.
terms. At one point he had said to me
that if things go sideways, Israel is a
place I can go. So it's very much bound
up in this sense of vulnerability that
he feels as someone who is Jewish and
October 7th just kind of crystallizes
all these fear and sense of
vulnerability. He says to me at one
point, this is a survival situation and
he means that as much for himself as it
is for other people.
>> And how does his really strong reaction
to this moment to these attacks shape
Palanteer's work?
There is no such thing anymore of being
on all sides. Palanteer only [music]
supplies its products to Western allies.
I am proud that we are supporting Israel
in every way we can. Palanteer already
has an office in Tel Aviv. Software has
been used [music] by the Mossad for a
number of years. But not long after
October 7th, it sends multiple engineers
there because the Israeli Defense Forces
want to use the software. There's
interest from Shinbet, which is the
domestic intelligence services. And
Karp's view is we're gonna give them
anything and everything they need.
Paler takes out a full page ad in the
New York Times saying that Palunteer
stands with Israel and this messaging is
not just directed at the general public.
It's also directed at Palanteer
employees because he says to me
privately that he wants it understood
that whereas he was very willing to
tolerate the dissent back during the
first Trump presidency over Palanter's
work with ICE, he's really not in the
mood to tolerate any internal disscent
over the work Palanteer is doing to
support Israel after October 7th.
>> Have you lost employees because of this?
>> We've lost employees. I'm sure we'll
lose employees. I'm [music] sure we'll
lose. You know, it's like if you have a
position that does not cost you ever to
lose an employee, it's not a position.
>> He says very clearly, if you can't abide
by what we're doing, then maybe
Palunteer isn't the place for you.
>> And all this is in a context in which
we're [music] seeing growing protests on
college campuses and elsewhere in the US
over Israel's response to these attacks.
the widescale bombing of Gaza. This is
very much top of mind.
>> Exactly.
>> And he is furious about the protests on
campus. And I'm telling young people,
you are breathing the vapors of a
dangerous new fake and uh
self-destructive religion when you are
sitting at your elite school pretending
because you watched Tik Tok twice
[music] and got an A+ on some crazy
paper that you actually understand the
world.
>> He is very outspoken in following
October 7th. very outspoken about the
protests on campuses, using every
opportunity he [music] can get to lash
out at the protesters to say that they
are delusional, that they are misguided.
And they don't see the contradiction in
their behavior of writing papers [music]
about micro discrimination and then
excluding the longest existing minority
overtly. They literally don't see the
contradiction.
>> He thinks the protests [music] are
riddled with anti-semitism and are very
dangerous. And he sees this as
reflective of a broader rot in his mind
on the left.
He remains supportive of President
Biden. He has written checks to the
Biden campaign and says he's going to
continue to do so because Biden has been
very supportive of the Israeli
government. But he's less happy with the
Democratic party in general. He believes
that the far left is the tail wagging
the dog and that the far left of the
Democratic party is anti-Israel and is
now becoming increasingly anti-Semitic.
>> So this kid who grew up a lefty
progressive no longer really sees
himself in the progressive wing of the
Democratic party.
>> That's right.
>> Not all criticism of Israel is
anti-semitism, but a larger portion of
it is than we realized. and we have to
call it out.
>> And he goes to an event in California,
the Reagan National Defense Forum in
December 2023.
>> And I'm one of the largest donors to the
Democratic party. And quite frankly, I'm
calling it out and I'm giving to
Republicans. If you keep up with this
behavior, I'm going to change. A lot of
people like me are going to change. We
have to really call this out. It is
completely beyond the bounds. and he
says that he wants the Democratic party
to speak in unambiguous terms to
unambiguously denounce the protesters
for being anti-Semitic and he thinks
that needs to be shut down. And if it's
not shut down, he's saying that he's
prepared to walk away from the
Democratic party.
>> And does he make good on that threat?
>> Yes, he starts donating much more
aggressively to Republicans after
October 7th. And in the private
conversations that he and I had, he
makes clear that he is looking much more
favorably on Republicans. and he's even
warming to the idea of a second Trump
presidency. Not long after October 7th,
we had a conversation and he had asked
me not to record the conversation, but
said I could take notes. And Trump's
name comes up and he says, and this was
unprovoked. I didn't even say anything.
And he says, "I don't think Trump is a
fascist. I don't think Trump is an
anti-semite. I don't think Trump is a
bigot." It really felt like he was
trying to convince himself of something.
And you know, at that point it became
clear to me that he believed that Trump
was likely to win the 2024 election and
that he was in a sense in a way talking
himself into getting behind that.
>> It's kind of wild to conceive of because
you know you told us that in the first
Trump term Karp was very open about
being against the administration,
against Trump himself. Do you think he
was trying to talk himself into
supporting Trump in part because he saw
there could be just a huge business
opportunity there? Well, I think he
certainly recognized that he was going
to have to say nice things about Trump
this time around. I mean, the first rule
of doing business in Donald Trump's
Washington is don't piss off Donald
Trump. The second rule is do everything
you can to curry favor with Donald
Trump. And if you're a major government
contractor, as Palanteer is, you have a
particularly acute need to curry favor
with Donald Trump. Sakarp recognizes
that a second Trump presidency is
potentially a huge opportunity for
Palanteer and he writes a million-doll
check to the Trump Vance inauguration
committee and Palanteer lands a number
of deals during the first months of
Trump's second presidency. Its software
is used extensively by Doge. It gets a10
billion dollar contract with the army
and it also gets another contract with
ICE this one for $30 million to help
with deportations. And amid all this
I'll tell you [music] something I think
Trump does very very well. He says I'm
not going to accept a paradigm that
essentially [music] leads to a stupid
conclusion.
>> Karp starts publicly singing Trump's
praises.
>> Honestly, I think he's quite brilliant
at this. So
>> saying lots [music] of nice things about
Donald Trump in public. I'm very
supportive of the president's border and
national security thing is really the
only two things that I actually focus on
and I guess in that sense I support the
president a lot and
>> he says that on the issues that are of
paramount [music] concern to him now the
border and national security he thinks
that Trump is doing a great job
>> like getting the peace deal closing the
border degrading Iran are world historic
accomplishments and I and I don't see
why [music] you wouldn't acknowledge
that I
>> and when confronted during interviews if
this represents a big shift in his own
position. He insists no. I didn't shift
my politics. [music] The political
parties have shifted their politics. The
idea that what's being called
progressive is in any way progressive
[music] is a complete farce. He
continues to insist that he's a true
progressive and he thinks that the left
has stopped being progressive.
>> I grew up in a [music] highly
intellectual, mostly Jewish, incredibly
left-wing environment. And every
Saturday and every Friday, I heard a
lecture about how the conservatives
[music] are going to destroy this
country with illegal immigration because
it's going to undermine the fabric
[music] of the American worker. That's
what it be means to be a progressive.
Being a progressive doesn't mean just oh
I oh it feels so good to be involved.
[music]
So I want to ask given the trajectory
that you've sketched out for us of this
incredibly powerful company Palunteer
being driven at least in part by the
evolution of its CEO Karp. We've been
talking about the work that Palanteer
does as being influenced by Karp's
personal politics, but I have to ask, do
you see his journey from anti-Trump to
now allin on the administration as
purely ideological
or is it about money? Because the shift
has obviously been incredibly profitable
for the company.
>> That's a combination of the two and what
proportion of each I can't really say. I
will say this, one of the things that
makes Karp such an interesting figure is
opportunism isn't good enough for him.
He has to find an ideological reason,
something personal/ ideological to
really get on board with something. It
can't just be opportunism. You see,
with, you know, a number of major tech
executives have gotten on board with
Trump the second time around. And with
some of them, the cravenness drips off
them like sweat. Karp is a little
different. He has found reasons to get
on board with Trump. Reasons in his own
mind, reasons that go beyond necessity
and opportunism. He thinks Trump is the
right guy.
>> On the issues he says he cares about,
immigration for example, does he engage
at all on the questions that people are
raising about ICE, using the data that
it has on the people in this country to,
you know, snatch people off the streets,
break up families, that kind of thing.
He and I have had a number of
conversations and he's kind of
dismissive of those concerns. He doesn't
really want to talk about them and he he
deflects them by saying that I and other
people just have Trump derangement
syndrome.
>> Meaning what?
>> Meaning that the people who raising
these issues, raising these concerns,
are just so hostile to Trump, so blinded
with rage at Trump that they can't think
rationally about these issues. But I
also know that Karp's views on
immigration have changed. And this goes
back to October 7th. Before October 7th,
he saw the immigration issue, he saw the
chaos at the border as bad for the
Democrats. After October 7th, he also
sees the immigration issue and the
border as bad for American Jews.
>> Why?
>> Because he thinks it's poking the bear
that an uncontrolled border, lots of
illegal immigration is radicalizing
Americans against diversity, which he
sees as really bad for the Jews. Because
if the voters want the border controlled
and a democratically elected government
doesn't deliver on what they want, they
may turn to more radical solutions, the
backlash next time may be even more
severe and people might turn to a
genuine autocrat, which would be in
Karp's view really bad for the Jews.
It's worth noting that there are people
who believe that Donald Trump, while
democratically elected, is leaning
toward autocratic tactics himself. And
it sounds like Karp doesn't believe
that. He believes there are many worse
options out there.
>> He pushes back furiously against any
suggestion that Trump is an autocrat or
a fascist. in a recent interview with
Andrew Ross Sorcin of the Times, for
instance.
>> Okay, so I want to ask you this. Um, and
it's a Trump question. There's a view,
and I'm curious where you land. Do you
think that President Trump is a fascist?
>> Of course not. I think that's stupid,
honestly. And you know what? Again, you
you can go all day on this stuff. It's
it's honestly idiotic.
>> He said that any suggestion that Trump
is a fascist is just stupid.
>> I grew up half my life in Germany. I
spent time with actual fascists. I went
and talked to lots of former Nazis. We
have a democratic society and you know
he won in a landslide. I don't
>> But did you ask him at all about the
rise of this anti-semitic wing of the
far right? I'm thinking specifically in
this case of Nick Fuentes, the white
nationalist who is apparently quite
popular with young conservative men in
particular. Yes, we've discussed it and
he has admitted to being concerned about
it and I think this goes some way to
explaining why he is so ardently behind
Donald Trump because again he fears that
if Trump doesn't deliver on his campaign
promises particularly on immigration
that what's going to come after this
could be even worse that a demagogue in
the mold of a fentes or someone like
that could come to power which Karp
thinks would be very bad for the country
and I think he sees the work that
Palanteer is doing with the Trump
administration as preventive in nature
in some sense.
>> Just to step back, Michael, you've
described this evolution of Karp, a guy
who grew up as a progressive and is now
out defending Trump on some of his most
aggressive policies.
I'm wondering how we should think about
the fact that Karp is running a company
that essentially enables Trump's work.
Do you think that KARP can accurately
assess when the Trump administration's
policies potentially tip over into
violating people's civil liberties or
potentially become more authoritarian in
nature? Like, do you think Karp would be
willing to do basically anything the
Trump administration wants his company
to do or not?
I don't know the answer to that, which
is kind of unsettling. I've been talking
to him for six years. He expresses very
strongly held views on a range of
issues, but he has not said to me in
private, nor has he said publicly what
his red lines are, what things the Trump
administration might do that would cause
him to reconsider Palanter's work with
the administration. I understand why he
doesn't want to say that because
Palanteer is a major government
contractor and it's not in Karp's
interest to tell the world what things
for instance ICE might do that would
cause Palanteer to reconsider its work
with ICE. But what this really comes
down to in a lot of ways is do you trust
Alex Karp's judgment about the moment
we're in? This is someone who is a
scholar of fascism. He knows what it
looks and sounds like and he's basically
asking us to believe that what we're
seeing here is not what many people
fear. That this is not incipient
authoritarianism. That the Trump
presidency is nothing out of the
ordinary. And the question is, do you
take his word for it? [music]
And so this really does come down in a
certain sense to how much you trust Alex
Karp, how [music] much you trust his
assessment of Donald Trump and of the
policies the Trump administration is
pursuing. Karp has said very candidly
that Palanter's technology can be used
for good [music] or bad. If abuse has
happened, do you trust Alex Karp to pull
the plug on the work that Palanteer is
doing with government [music] agencies?
And do you trust him to correctly assess
when that's happening? And do you trust
him [music] ultimately to be willing to
sacrifice Palunteer's business interest
in defense of those values?
>> Well, Michael, thanks [music] so much
for coming on the show.
>> Thank you for having me.
>> [music]
[music]
>> We'll be right back.
Here's what [music] else you need to
know today. Nick Reiner, the son of the
Hollywood director Rob Reiner and
Michelle [music] Singer Reiner, has been
arrested on suspicion of murdering his
parents, the police said on Monday.
[music]
The couple were found dead in their Los
Angeles home on Sunday afternoon. Two
people briefed on the case said they'd
been [music] stabbed to death. Rob
Reiner directed a series of iconic and
beloved films, including This is Spinal
Tap, The Princess Bride, [music] and
When Harry Met Sally. Michelle Singer
Riner was a photographer and later a
producer.
Their 32-year-old son, Nick, had spoken
out over the years about his [music]
struggles with drug abuse and bouts of
homelessness. The police said he's being
held without bail.
Today's episode was produced by Caitlyn
[music] O'Keefe, Ricky Nevetski, and
Stella Tan. It was edited by Lisa Chow,
fact checked by Susan Lee, contains
music [music] by Marian Lozano, Pat
McCusker, Dan Powell, and Rowan Nemisto,
and was engineered by Alyssa Moxley.
Special thanks to Lissa Anderson.
[music]
That's it for the Daily. I'm Natalie
Kitro. [music]
See you tomorrow.